



the ALGARVE ITS People
For much of the world, the Algarve is synonymous with Portugal, yet the Portuguese will tell you the exact opposite: the region has little in common with the rest of the country. The southern stretch of coast is more reminiscent of a North African lscape than a European one. It has no cosmopolitan cities, like Lisbon  Porto, which are farther north. Most of Portugal is known for quaint towns, medieval castles,  gr palaces. The Algarve is more recognizable for impenetrable blocks of tourist apartments, hotels,  meticulously manicured golf courses.
And beaches. Think Algarve  the mind pictures long, glorious stretches of golden ss, secluded coves framed by odd ochre-colored rock formations,  deep green waters. With about 160 km (100 miles) of coastline, Portugal’s southern province is one of Europe’s premier beach destinations. The occasionally chilly ocean is the Atlantic, but the Algarve has a sultry Mediterranean feel.
Its consistent climate is the best in Portugal,  one of the kindest in the world: more than 250 days of sunshine a year — more than almost any other international resort area. The moderating effect of the Gulf Stream produces a fresh springtime breeze throughout winter,  in late January  February, white almond blossoms blanket the fields. In summer the heat is intense but rarely unbearable,  regardless, beautiful beaches  innumerable pools are always just a dive away.
Magnificent year-round weather has made the Algarve a huge destination for sporting vacations. Superb golf facilities abound — several with tees dramatically clinging to cliffs  fairways just skirting the edge of the ocean —  horseback riding, tennis, big-game fishing, sailing,  windsurfing are immensely popular.
Sports, beaches  hospitable weather — not to mention easily organized package vacations — are surely the reasons the Algarve receives as many visitors as the rest of Portugal in its entirety. But it’s not just international tourists that descend on the Algarve; many Portuguese from Lisbon  elsewhere in the north have holiday homes  spend their summer vacations here.
The coast is neatly divided into the rugged Barlavento to the west  the flat beauty of Sotavento to the east. West is where you’ll find the famous orange cliffs  surreal eroded rock stacks. Near Cabo de São Vicente  Sagres, the extreme western point, the terrain is surprisingly barren  the facilities decidedly low-key. The ocean can also be forbiddingly cold.
Tourist resorts clutter the entire middle of the coast, from Lagos to Faro, with a spectrum of homes away from home — monster high-rises to low-rider villas — spilling across the rolling hills  lining the beaches. Resorts like Portimão, Albufeira  Vilamoura would appear to have little room left to grow, yet tourist facilities seem to mate with each other  reproduce overnight. Much of the unstoppable growth is crass  frighteningly commercial,  the crowds in summer unbearable.
The eastern third of the Algarve is a more sedate marriage of coast  ocean, with warm waters  hot ss stretching past the wetls of Ria Formosa to the Spanish border. The Algarve’s most picturesque town, Tavira, is along this section of the coast.
Away from the coast, the terrain slopes through pines, mimosa, eucalyptus,  heather to an altitude of nearly 915 m (3,000 ft). Vacationers wishing to escape the maddening beach crowds can run for the hills, especially the tantalizing Serra de Monchique.
The region’s exotic name is derived from the Arabic,Al-Gharb, meaning “country of the west.” The westernmost territory of Europe was highly prized by North African Moors, who occupied it from the eighth to the 13th centuries. Their half millennium here left indelible traces, seen today in whitewashed houses, hilltop castles,  colorful ceramic tiles.
Following the Reconquest of Iberia by Christians, the Algarve led Portugal to glory  fortune. Prince Henry the Navigator established his legendary Navigation School along Portugal’s southern coast (financing expeditions with royalties from the Algarve fishing industry),  intrepid explorers set out in caravels from Lagos  Sagres. In the 15th  16th centuries, they ushered in an Age of Discovery, rounding Africa’s Cape of Good Hope  eventually reaching India  the Pacific. Others found their way to the Americas  Brazil. Opening world trade routes across the globe, they established Portugal as a maritime superpower. Spices, gold,  diamonds flowed across the seas to Lisbon.
Portugal soon lapsed into decline, though, tattered by wars  constitutional crises,  for two centuries or more the Algarve remained isolated from the rest of Europe. Even though the coast received many illustrious visitors from Roman times through the Middle Ages  up to the Edwardian period (when travelers came to luxuriate in Monchique’s spa waters), the Algarve’s elite vacation status is a relatively recent phenomenon. The first resort on the coast, Praia da Rocha, was only “discovered” in the 1930s,  the real build-up didn’t kick into overdrive until the beginning of the 1980s.
Spain’s Costa del Sol developed earlier  more rapidly ( some would say, more disastrously). Yet the lessons of rampant, ill-advised development across the border were not heeded. Only recently has environmental  aesthetic consciousness at least mated that newer developments be limited to low-rises.
Yet — quite remarkably, in the face of the ongoing tourism onslaught — parts of the Algarve retain their old-fashioned charm. The main road along the coast, EN-125, is lined with ceramic shops  stifled with summertime traffic, but the agricultural countryside to the north is a different world. Flowering orchards  gentle grain fields replace hotels, apartments,  snack bars. A slow, rural lifestyle perseveres against the rush of modern life.
For centuries, fishing has been the Algarve’s lifeblood. Small fishing villages preserve their simple  unaffected ways, seemingly oblivious to the tourist hordes. Scrappy crews of small h-painted boats troll the waters just offshore,  trawlers fish deep in the Atlantic for big shoals of bacalhau (cod) so beloved by the Portuguese.
A visit to the local fish market is a revealing window into Algarvian life. Negotiations are serious but friendly. The same scenario is played out a thous times a day at markets all across the region; every town has a market day at least once a month. Farmers bring their livestock to trade,  artisans  itinerant vendors sell their wares.
Not a large area, the Algarve is relatively easy to get around, whether by train or car (an effort that is much more relaxing outside of the main summer season). The distances between mega-resorts  unspoiled villages are surprisingly small.
Besides beaches, the Algarve’s major attractions are towns that lived through centuries of adventure, triumph,  disaster. Faro, Tavira,  Lagos are towns with a strong Moorish influence,  quiet mountain towns like Silves, Alte,  Salir are reminders of the days before golf courses  hotel chains.
Despite the region’s ancient roots, few historic monuments survive from before 1755, when the Algarve was rocked by a monumental earthquake that took thouss of lives  leveled buildings as far north as Lisbon. Still, you’ll find vestiges of a vibrant past, including evocative castle ruins  churches with extraordinary displays of Portuguese glazed tiles. Even the humblest village has a classic white church, a sleepy plaza shaded by vivid purple jacara, , if you time it right, the drama of the local market.
The Portuguese are famously hospitable, if reserved. And they remain tolerant  helpful, even though they know that their lovely coast is no longer just theirs.



